Even casual looks at the sky a few hours apart show the stars moving westward during the night. More careful observation shows that they move as if attached to a large sphere surrounding Earth. The sphere’s axis of rotation passes through the North and South poles, so that Polaris (the “North Star”)—which lies very close to this axis—appears to barely move. This imaginary sphere rotates once every 23 hours and 56 minutes. The 4 minute difference between this rate and the 24 hour day accumulates to 2 hours per month and a whole day in a year. For this reason, the positions of the constellations, as seen at a certain time of night, can be identified with the seasons. For example, Orion culminates (reaches its highest point in the sky) at about midnight in December, but by March it does so at about 600 pm. In June this happens at about noon, so that it cannot be seen at night. By September it culminates at about 600 am. In December it is back where it started.

An observer at the Equator eventually gets to see all the stars, by waiting all night or all year. An observer at the North Pole sees only the same stars all the time, and these stars appear to go around in horizontal circles. At the South Pole a completely different set of stars is seen. In the midlatitudes there are some stars that never rise, some that never set, and a large number that rise and set daily. Australians get to see Crux (the Southern Cross) but never the Big Dipper. Observers in the northern United States see the Big Dipper but never the Southern Cross. In both countries Orion appears half the time. These motions are due to Earth’s daily rotation on its axis, combined with its yearly revolution around the Sun.

Note that the constellations maintain their shapes as the stars appear to move in lock step. The individual stars actually move independently, however. Their very gradual apparent motions will, after hundreds of thousands of years, make the current constellations unrecognizable. Astronomers call these individual apparent motions “proper motion.” A star’s proper motion, combined with its motion toward or away from the observer, is used to determine the star’s actual velocity, relative to the other stars. This speed can be hundreds of miles per second. The distances to stars are so great, however, that these motions are not noticeable to the naked eye over a human lifetime.